Incident lifecycle frameworks provide
a structure to support incident response
operations.
Frameworks help organizations develop
a standardized approach to their incident
response process, so
that incidents are managed in
an effective and consistent way.
There are many different types of
frameworks that organizations can adopt
and modify according to their needs.
In this course, we'll
focus on the NIST CSF.
Then, we'll expand on the CSF and
discuss the phases of the NIST
incident response lifecycle.
To recall, the five core functions
of the NIST CSF are: identify,
protect, detect, respond, and recover.
This course will explore the last
three steps of this framework:
detect, respond, and recover.
These last three steps are critical
stages during incident response, and
as an analyst, you'll detect and
respond to incidents and
implement actions for recovery.
The NIST incident response lifecycle is
another NIST framework with additional substeps
dedicated to incident response.
It begins with preparation.
Next, detection and analysis, and
then containment, eradication and recovery,
and finally post-incident activity.
One thing to note is that the incident
lifecycle isn't a linear process.
It's a cycle, which means that steps can
overlap as new discoveries are made.
This lifecycle gives us a blueprint of
how to effectively respond to incidents,
but before we dive into incident
detection and response,
let's take some time to
understand what an incident is.
According to NIST, an incident is
"an occurrence that actually or imminently
jeopardizes, without lawful authority,
the confidentiality, integrity, or
availability of information or
an information system;
or constitutes a violation or
imminent threat of violation of law,
security policies, security procedures, or
acceptable use policies."
Whoa, that's a lot to take in.
Let's break it down.
It's important to understand that all
security incidents are events, but
not all events are security incidents.
What are events?
An event is an observable occurrence
on a network, system, or device.
Here's an example of an event. A user
attempts to log into their email account,
but they can't because they
forgot their password.
The user then requests a password reset
and successfully changes their password.
This is an observable event.
Why?
Because systems and applications
log password reset requests and
logs provide evidence
that something happened.
We know that someone successfully
requested a password reset and
that they did not violate security
policies to access the account.
Now, imagine that instead of
the rightful owner of the account,
a malicious actor trying to
gain access to the account,
successfully initiated the password change
request and changed the account password.
This would be considered both an event and
a security incident.
It's an event because it's
an observable occurrence.
It's also a security incident because
a malicious actor violated the security
policy to unlawfully access an account
that is not rightfully theirs.
Remember, all security incidents
are events, but not all events are security incidents.
Just like detectives
working a case carefully handle and
document their evidence and findings,
security analysts are required to do
the same when they investigate a security
incident.
An incident investigation reveals
critical information about the five W's
of an incident:
who triggered the incident,
what happened,
when the incident took place,
where the incident took place, and
why the incident occurred.
Keeping track of this information is
essential not only during an incident
investigation, but also during
the closure of an investigation
when it comes time to write the final
report. As an analyst, you'll need a method
to document and reference this information
for easy access when you need it.
A great way to do this is to use
an incident handler's journal,
which is a form of documentation
used in incident response.
Throughout this course, you'll be using
your own incident handler's journal to take
notes of any incident details.
We'll discuss more on documentation
in the upcoming lessons.